---
title: How AI-native companies could be transformed, case Lemonade
date: 2024-08-13
description: A case example showing how to overcome challenges in AI native companies.
---

# How AI-native companies could be transformed, case Lemonade



Nowadays many companies have started to think of AI transformation to harvest the potential of the most hyped new technology. There are anyhow already companies that have started as AI native, meaning that they have had AI as their principal technological foundation from the beginning. As reality tends to take its toll from all, not excusing the most fashionable ones, it may turn out to be so that even an AI native company could need a strategic transformation. We will take a look at one such case here. 
Founded in 2015, Lemonade is a full-stack US Insurance company with a novel business concept (Collis and Ellet, 2024). The founders of Lemonade considered the existing insurance industry model as flawed and created a new kind of insurance company based on the use of AI, behavioural economics and promoting social impact. Lemonade implemented the digital technologies such as AI and blockchain for better customer insights, risk analysis, insurance policy optimization, pricing, customer interface automation and fraud detection. As an act of social responsibility, Lemonade gifts unpaid claims to charities chosen by the customers. Lemonade also created a ‘collaborative insurance policy’, open sourced and available at GitHub for feedback, co-creation and continuous feedback. The approach is a good example of a low-cost disruptive innovation popularized by Clayton Christensen, a small company creating something that the large companies have failed to provide (Schildt, H. 2024, Day 2.).
A few years back ‘insurtech’ startups benefited from a surge of venture capital investments, and Lemonade gained total investment of $480 million. In 2020 Lemonade filed for IPO at $2 billion (Collis and Ellet, 2024). While the company has enjoyed steady revenue growth, it is still not yet profitable, and only expects to achieve positive EBITDA in 2026 (Yahoo Finance, 2024). Applying the famous Porter’s Five Forces framework, Lemonade can be seen as a new innovative entry in the US insurance market, but its main challenge seems to be the competition from the existing firms (Schildt, H. 2024, Day 2).
The book by Lafley and Martin (2013) provides a framework that can be used in the strategy work of Lemonade. The framework presents five key decisions for companies: defining a winning aspiration, deciding where to play, determining how to win, identifying core capabilities, and establishing management systems. All of these aspects should be covered by the strategy.
As an attempt to improve the performance of Lemonade we consider three different strategic scenarios. The scenarios are not completely mutually exclusive, but they might be so complex and resource demanding that it would not be possible to execute all of those simultaneously.
As the first, but not necessarily the highest priority alternative, we consider the acquisition of Lemonade by some large incumbent insurance company. This alternative would combine the large customer and revenue base of the incumbent, and the disruptive innovations and efficiency of Lemonade. The likely downside would naturally be the typical problems of mergers and acquisitions, e.g. at least temporary drop in business performance and cultural clashes between the merged companies. Anyhow if successful, the emerging new company would have a potential to become a superior player in the US insurance market, with abundant innovative capabilities and financial resources.
As the second alternative for Lemonade we consider the possibility of becoming a platform provider for other insurance companies. The platform would provide the innovative technology capabilities of Lemonade to other insurance companies. The strategy would require an additional investment to productizing the platform and related marketing, sales and customer support. It should be noted that already several companies do provide such AI based solutions specifically targeted for the insurance sector, e.g. EXL Service, SAS and Accenture, (EXL n.d.), (SAS. n.d.), (Accenture n.d.). To become more competitive though, Lemonade should consider becoming more than a component supplier in a hierarchy-based value system (Schildt, H. 2024, Day 2). In order to survive and excel among the competition, our proposed approach is to protect the brand of Lemonade in the insurance ecosystem by requiring the platform users to show logo ‘powered by Lemonade’ in their communications material. Another variation of the ecosystem strategy would be to provide the Lemonade insurance service as an additional Lemonade branded complementary insurance service for the customers of e.g. electronics retailers: after selling e.g. an expensive TV set to a customer the customer would be asked if he would like to buy an additional Lemonade insurance for his TV. As an insurance specialist Lemonade could offer a competitive branded product both for the end customer and the retailer.
As the third alternative we propose the possibility to expand Lemonade’s portfolio beyond insurance. One alternative could be providing loans. Lemonade’s capability to analyze the customers could be extended to analyze their creditworthiness. Lemonade has also the capability to provide an easy-to-use mobile app and delightful customer service.
The three scenarios above should be just a starting point for further strategic analysis. Several methods could help to analyze the draft strategies, such as creating a Business Model Canvas (Schildt, H. 2024, day 2, p. 57), and Strategy Canvas (Schildt, H. 2024, day 2, p. 49). Scenario-based analysis could be used to analyze the possible futures related to the draft strategies (Vilkkumaa E. 2024). The analysis should involve many kinds of stakeholders to ensure a wide access to different viewpoints, knowledge and experience. After such deeper analysis the strategic scenarios could be further developed and actual implementable strategy could be defined.
Specific attention should be made to ensure that the feedback loop from ideas to strategy implementations should be fast (Schildt, H. 2024, day 2, p. 59). While the scenario-based analysis could improve the understanding of the future, it is impossible to replace the learnings from practical experiments. Strategy work should thus be a continuous process, utilizing feedback immediately to readjust the strategic plans. It should be noted that specific attention should be made to communicating strategies that can change rapidly. Ensuring commitment inside Lemonade and its ecosystem should also be managed well, as constant changes of the plans could cause Lemonade’s credibility to erode.
Finally it should be noted that all the aspects of strategy presented by Lafley and Martin (2013) should be covered, including the winning aspiration, where to play, how to win, core capabilities, and management systems. In addition to the earlier discussion in this text, especially the expansion to becoming a branded platform provider and provider of loans would require new capabilities and renewal of the managements systems. Acquisition by another company would naturally cause a major renewal of all the five strategy aspects of the resulting company. In all studied scenarios it would be essential to convince the owners of Lemonade about the necessity of the strategic change. Especially the scenarios becoming a platform provider and expanding beyond insurance services would require additional investments by Lemonade’s owners, while the acquisition by a larger insurance company apparently would not do so.
## References
Accenture. (n.d.). AI Transforming Claims and Underwriting. Retrieved June 2, 2024, from https://www.accenture.com/fi-en/insightsnew/insurance/ai-transforming-claims-underwriting
Collis, D.J. and Ellet, W., 2024. Case Study IN1673: PDF ENG. [online] Harvard Business School.  Available at: https://services.hbsp.havard.edu/api/courses/1172663/items/IN1673-PDF-ENG/sclinks/c65c98d0d7f36c75230b7d8fd15f8fb1 [Accessed 19 May 2024].
EXL. (n.d.). Financial services and insurance leaders confront AI growing pains; focus shifts to large-scale integration. Retrieved June 2, 2024, from https://www.exlservice.com/about/newsroom/financial-services-and-insurance-leaders-confront-ai-growing-pains-focus-shifts-to-large-scale-integration
Lafley, A.G. and Martin, R.L. (2013) Playing to Win: How Strategy Really Works. Boston, MA: Harvard Business Review Press.
SAS. (n.d.). Artificial Intelligence in Insurance. Retrieved June 2, 2024, from https://www.sas.com/fi_fi/industry/insurance/technology/ai.html
Schildt, H. (2024) ‘Global Strategy, Day 2’ [PowerPoint slides]. Lectures at Aalto University; Helsinki, Finland. 7 May.
Vilkkumaa E. (2024) ‘Analytical methods for scenario-based strategy work’ [PowerPoint slides]. Lectures at Aalto University; Helsinki, Finland. 30 May.
Yahoo Finance, 2024. Lemonade, Inc. (LMND) Reports Strong Results. [online] Available at: https://finance.yahoo.com/news/lemonade-inc-lmnd-reports-strong-220240882.html?guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&guce_referrer_sig=AQAAAJARZDKlX0BxTe4qXYHI_JJdvqBv76Wd1503e8XvUkVhaXuRp8kCz2ctZf8MwEELku8Vcw4I6rztuiB62ZVuUBE3EOLfAMSOAedRp1g23MihObqdnyoUt5P17J5pG5XFsCRC32ABHtc08dC9QA1XKLFoU_YMQFxOgzJdPSSgLG84[Accessed 19 May 2024].